ADR-0000 Introduce ADR process (#21947)
opf/openproject: docs/decisions/adr-0000-introduce-adrs.md

How can we make architectural decisions transparent, durable, and discoverable across time and teams?

## Decision Drivers

- Preserve architectural knowledge over time
- Improve onboarding of new developers
- Avoid repeatedly revisiting the same decisions
- Avoid fragmented architecture with inconsistent solutions
- Provide clear reasoning for non-obvious technical choices
- Support distributed and asynchronous collaboration
- Keep the codebase lightweight and maintainable

## Considered Options

- Do not formally document architectural decisions
- Document decisions in the wiki or as OpenProject work packages of a specific type
- Document decisions in commit messages and pull requests
- Use Architecture Decision Records (ADRs) within the documentation folder

## Decision Outcome

> Chosen option: **"Use Architecture Decision Records (ADRs) within the documentation folder)"**, because it provides a lightweight, structured, version-controlled method for documenting architectural decisions while keeping documentation close to the codebase and easy to maintain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Chosen option: **"Use Architecture Decision Records (ADRs) within the documentation folder"**, because it provides a lightweight, structured, version-controlled method for documenting architectural decisions while keeping documentation close to the codebase and easy to maintain.
```

### Consequences

- Good, because decisions and their rationale are preserved long-term

> - Good, because new team members can quickly understand system architecture

Reviewer: I am wondering whether this will be true. Once we have our first 20 ADRs that are sorted by time of introduction, I am really wondering whether they are:

* quick to grasp
* giving a proper understanding of the system architecture

This sounds like the intended/hoped for outcome.

In other words (no clue if this is formally correct):

```suggestion
- Good, because new team members can quickly understand system architecture
- Risk, that we only get the added work (reading and writing ADRs), without intended benefits
```

Author: I see the point. The question is, how deep you have to go into the ADR to understand it. The points **Decision Outcome** and **Consequences** are the sections where somebody who just wants to understand **what** the decision is, can basically stop reading. If for example a new developer wants to dive deeper and see for example why we chose Turbo as our frontend technology, they can continue reading on.

Maybe there should also be a one pager that looks something like.

> # We use Turbo as our frontend technology
> Bla bla bla .. explanation. For further details, see [ADR-0042](#)
>
> # We use Grape for our API
> Bla Bla Bla .. explanation. For further details, see [ADR-0001](#)

So we have something to point people to so that they can quickly grasp the outcomes, without needing to read through many pages of details.

Reviewer: I like this idea.

It will work sufficiently for "tool choices" at least. Once you get to processes and patterns that need explaining, I think there is the part where you still need to explain the pattern as part of the ADR.

E.g. some of my later comments in this PR are about our implementation choices for ADRs. That's something people should also read.

- Good, because future changes can evaluate past trade-offs

> - Good, because discussions become more focused and evidence-based

Reviewer: I just realized a good aspect, while reading and adding criticism here:

```suggestion
- Good, because discussions become more focused and evidence-based
- Good, because ADR change proposals can make use of pull request tooling
```

> - Bad, because writing ADRs adds a small overhead to decision making

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Bad, because writing ADRs adds an overhead to decision making
```

- Bad, because teams must learn and consistently follow a new process

### Confirmation

Compliance will be confirmed by:

- A repository folder `/docs/decisions/`
- ADRs stored as Markdown files and version-controlled
- Pull request checklist reminding to create an ADR for architectural decisions
- Architecture reviews referencing relevant ADRs
- Periodic audits by the development team

## Pros and Cons of the Options

### Do not formally document architectural decisions

- Good, because no additional process overhead
- Neutral, because decisions can still be discussed informally
- Bad, because knowledge is lost over time
- Bad, because onboarding becomes difficult
- Bad, because decisions are repeatedly debated
- Bad, because teams may implement inconsistent solutions

### Document decisions in the wiki or issue tracker

- Good, because easy to write and familiar to teams

> - Good, because searchable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Good, because searchable
- Good, because referenceable from other work items
- Good, because tracking time on the work involved in an ADR is possible
```

edit: After being nearly done, with the review, I could log more than an hour on ADR-0000 for the initial review alone

- Neutral, because can hold discussion history

> - Bad, because documentation becomes outdated

Reviewer: I don't understand this point. It's actually something that I see as a risk for the chosen markdown approach as well. Why is documentation in a work package (for which we'd also have a process that people would dutifullly follow) more prone to becoming outdated than documentation in a markdown file?

IMO we should either:

* remove this bad point here
* add this bad point to the chosen solution as well

Author: My point was that if it does not live with the code, it will become outdated and "forgotten" more easily. Happy for better wording suggestions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Bad, because documentation away from code becomes outdated more easily
```

- Bad, because it is disconnected from the codebase

### Document decisions in commit messages and pull requests

- Good, because documentation lives with code
- Good, because no additional system needed
- Neutral, because reasoning is partially preserved
- Bad, because information is fragmented
- Bad, because difficult to discover or search systematically
- Bad, because PR systems are not designed for long-term documentation

> ### Use Architecture Decision Records (ADRs) within the codebase

Reviewer: I am confused. This sounds like the chosen option, but:

* it has a slightly different name than the chosen option
* It has different Good and Bad points than the chosen option (where it's called "Consequences")

Maybe I am overlooking a small difference between the good/bad aspect of an option and the good/bad aspect of a consequence?

Author: Different wording is a typo, fixed that.

The template that I based this on says that the consequences should weigh again what the impact of the chosen decision was. I am also not too happy. I think it makes more sense to have a few more paragraphs on the decision. Let me update it.

Author: I added ce10941f36e to remove consequences and give every other option a little bit of room in the decision process why it was not chosen.

Reviewer: I like that.

> - Good, because decisions are version-controlled alongside the code

Reviewer: Is that actually a good thing? We are right now in the lucky position that we only keep supporting older versions of OpenProject for only a month, but this sounds like a risk to me, because I could easily refer to an outdated ADR due to this.

Author: I think ADRs should always be references from the `dev` branch.

- Good, because standardized structure improves clarity
- Good, because easy to review in pull requests
- Good, because chronological numbering provides historical context
- Neutral, because requires minimal process discipline

> - Bad, because requires team training and adoption effort

Reviewer 2: Points already diverged, is duplicating them in this section needed?

Author: Adressed this below. The points should only be listed here.

## More Information

ADRs will:

- Be numbered sequentially starting with `ADR-0000`
- Use the MADR template from [https://adr.github.io/madr/](https://adr.github.io/madr/)
- ADRs will be required for significant architectural decisions, such as:
  - introducing a new technology, including:

>     - new RubyGems or NPM packages when they are not trivial and introduce new usage patterns (i.e. Angular, React, dry-rb, etc.)

Author: I hope it is clear enough that I do not mean that every new gem or NPM package needs an ADR. It should be that if we do something like switch from Angular to Turbo, etc that this should become an ADR.

Reviewer: Only future will tell how clear this was. Taking the dry-rb example: AFAIK it was introduced as a "test balloon" in storages and now it lives an isolated life there.

To me the question would be at which point we start the ADR process:

* before launching the test balloon
    * Good, because it ensures that the decision and its drivers are documented properly
    * Bad, because it could lead to process fatigue
* after launching the test balloon
    * Good, because ideas can be quickly validated/falsified
    * Bad, because after the fact people are less likely to care about proper documentation

Author: I guess it depends a bit. If we had had an ADR that specifies that our Service objects use our own service classes, than introducing dry-monads would have needed an ADR that replaces the old one. In that process the developers would have to make a case why the new solution is better than the old one. And we would have to make a decision to switch our entire codebase.

But I get your point. We need to be allowed to play around with technologies. But at some point we will have to make a decision if the new technology is a viable way forward or not. And if we decide either way one will have to bite into the sour apple and depending on outcome in this case

a) Get rid of our old service classes in the entire codebase and replace them with dry-monads
b) Get rid of the "test balloon" and replace dry-monads with our old service classes

But than we also have to agree that there must be time set aside to go through with these.

>     - introducing new databases or services that need to be included in the deployment process

Author: This would be something like introducing hocuspocus. This needs to be considered in the deployment process, etc, so it should at least be discussed how SaaS, self-hosted, docker, etc deployments work.

>     - introducing new databases or services that need to be included in the deployment process

Reviewer: Hocuspocus ADR incoming?

Reviewer 3: Honest question, do we consider adding ADRs for decisions made before we introduced ADRs? I can see why it would be nice from a documentation standpoint, but I don't know how sane it would be 😅

Reviewer 4: If we still need to abide by those decisions (and the assumptions still make sense), then it's probably a good idea to codify that.

    - introducing dependencies on external services
  - changing architecture

>   - altering system boundaries or APIs

Reviewer: Both points above seem unclear to me to be honest. Happy to learn through discourse what they mean, but let me phrase some ways to misunderstand them:

* I am pretty sure we do not literally want to make an ADR for every API (v3) change, but it can be easily read that way
* what is a system boundary? what is architecture?
    * I think both terms are vague enough that different people can have a clear idea what they mean and completely disagree about it

Author: Up for suggestions. With system boundaries I tried to convey that if we start including something new in our system that was not previously part. Like adding deployments via helm charts or that we now also include apache/nginx configs to allow websockets and SSE.

The API I meant something like the introduction of GraphQL or an API v4.

Please help with better wording :)

Reviewer: Serious question (while I am thinking about a real suggestion): Should introduction of MCP have been an ADR?

Author: Good question. I have not looked deeply enough into this. If it is consuming the existing API and just offers some tools to increase visibility. Probably not.

If it is something that every developer in the future needs to consider and build their objects, APIs in a certain way to be picked up. If it requires to add a testing harness in a special way to ensure my new model works properly with MCP. Then probably yes.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  - changing established architecture or coding patterns (e.g. moving from Angular to Hotwire)
  - extending the system's boundaries (e.g. new deployment components such as websocket/SSE servers or reverse-proxy config) or making breaking changes to a public API
```

  - making irreversible or costly-to-change decisions

> - Be immutable once accepted (updates require a new ADR that supersedes the previous one)

Reviewer: While I understand the idea behind this, I am curious how this will play out in practice (especially for the "easy to onboard" part.

E.g. If we discover that any of the lines above was too unclear and we need to change it, the ADR process fragments itself, because the new ADR will need to:

* document why ADRs themselves are a good/bad idea
* document why the change to the initial implementation of ADRs was necessary

if you leave the first part out, then it **will** become hard to onboard anyone onto ADRs, because you'd need to read through the full change history of an ADR "topic" to fully grasp it.

Author: I guess the ADR process itself is maybe the one that will need this the most. But once we have agreed that we want to do an ADR process, then if we want to change something about this process, we don't need to argue again that the process itself should be implemented.

If we want to change the ADR process, we introduce a new ADR suggestion that only argues why the new proposed solution is better than the old process/template. It does not need to roll up the entire discussion about `ADR-0000`.

So if for example ADR-0100 states that we want to change the process and get rid of half the template, or that we switch to storing the ADRs in OpenProject. Than this is the current ADR about the ADR process. A new developer only needs to know "this is our ADR process" and if they are interested in the history of **why** we added the process, they can go back and read this ADR.

> - Be revisited when:

Reviewer 2: To me revisited suggests changing the decision which contradicts immutability.

Also is it worth mentioning the way (removal, marking them so, …) to handle outdated decisions?

Author: The process is mentioned in the readme, i don't think it needs to be part of the template. WDYT?

About revisiting, yeah, I agree, let's word this differently. The process is that it can be superseded and be archived. See the README for details.

Reviewer 4: @toy Changed to `Be superseded by a new ADR when (the original is then marked as superseded and archived):`

  - the system architecture significantly changes
  - assumptions are no longer valid
  - the decision causes operational or development friction

>     This ADR establishes ADRs as the authoritative record of architectural decisions in this project.

Reviewer: Formatting error? This line is still part of "be revisited when"

```suggestion

This ADR establishes ADRs as the authoritative record of architectural decisions in this project.
```

---
status: "accepted"
date: 2026-02-10
decision-makers: OpenProject Development Team
consulted:
informed: All developers
---

# Introduce Architecture Decision Records (ADRs)

## Context and Problem Statement

> Our software systems are growing in complexity and team size. Architectural and technical decisions are currently communicated verbally, through chat, or buried in pull requests and tickets. As a result, developers often lack context about _why_ a solution was chosen, leading to repeated discussions, inconsistent implementations, and accidental regressions. Additionally, the same problem is solved with different tools within the same codebase, creating a fragmented architecture. We need a way to make architectural decisions transparent, durable, and discoverable across time and teams.

Reviewer 4: @klaustopher 

```suggestion
Our software systems are growing in complexity and team size. Architectural, technical, and significant process decisions are currently communicated verbally, through chat, or buried in pull requests and tickets. As a result, developers often lack context about _why_ a solution was chosen, leading to repeated discussions, inconsistent implementations, and accidental regressions. Additionally, the same problem is solved with different tools within the same codebase, creating a fragmented architecture. We need a way to make architectural decisions transparent, durable, and discoverable across time and teams.
```

> How can we make architectural decisions transparent, durable, and discoverable across time and teams?

Reviewer 4: @klaustopher 

```suggestion
How can we make architectural and other significant cross-cutting decisions transparent, durable, and discoverable across time and teams?
```

- Neutral, because can hold discussion history
- Bad, because documentation away from code becomes outdated more easily
- Bad, because it is disconnected from the codebase

### Document decisions in commit messages and pull requests

- Good, because documentation lives with code
- Good, because no additional system needed
- Neutral, because reasoning is partially preserved
- Bad, because information is fragmented
- Bad, because difficult to discover or search systematically
- Bad, because PR systems are not designed for long-term documentation

### Use Architecture Decision Records (ADRs) within the codebase

- Good, because decisions are version-controlled alongside the code
- Good, because standardized structure improves clarity
- Good, because easy to review in pull requests
- Good, because chronological numbering provides historical context
- Neutral, because requires minimal process discipline
- Bad, because requires team training and adoption effort

## More Information

ADRs will:

- Be numbered sequentially starting with `ADR-0000`
- Use the MADR template from [https://adr.github.io/madr/](https://adr.github.io/madr/)

> - ADRs will be required for significant architectural decisions, such as:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- ADRs will be required for significant decisions, such as:
```

or possibly

```suggestion
- Use "ADR" in its broad sense of *Any Decision Record* (as in MADR, *Markdown Any Decision Records*), covering architecture as well as significant technical and process/collaboration decisions
- ADRs will be required for significant decisions, such as:
```

  - introducing a new technology, including:
    - new RubyGems or NPM packages when they are not trivial and introduce new usage patterns (i.e. Angular, React, dry-rb, etc.)
    - introducing new databases or services that need to be included in the deployment process
    - introducing dependencies on external services
  - changing architecture
  - altering system boundaries or APIs
  - making irreversible or costly-to-change decisions

>   - influencing how multiple teams work

Reviewer 4: @klaustopher 

```suggestion
  - establishing or changing how teams collaborate or how we run the development process, such as:
    - code review practices
    - the role of AI assistance in development
    - branching, merge, or release conventions
```
